ACT II. Scene I.
A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.

Enter Romeo alone.

  Rom. Can I go forward when my heart is here?
    Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
                     [Climbs the wall and leaps down within it.]

                   Enter Benvolio with Mercutio.

  Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
  Mer. He is wise,
    And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
  Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.
    Call, good Mercutio.
  Mer. Nay, I'll conjure too.
    Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
    Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
    Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
    Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
    Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,  
    One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
    Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
    When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
    He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
    The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
    I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
    By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
    By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
    And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
    That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
  Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
  Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
    To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
    Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
    Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
    That were some spite; my invocation
    Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
    I conjure only but to raise up him.
  Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
    To be consorted with the humorous night.  
    Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
  Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
    Now will he sit under a medlar tree
    And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
    As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
    O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
    An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
    Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
    This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
    Come, shall we go?
  Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
    'To seek him here that means not to be found.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene II.
Capulet's orchard.

Enter Romeo.

  Rom. He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

                     Enter Juliet above at a window.

    But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?
    It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
    Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
    Who is already sick and pale with grief
    That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
    Be not her maid, since she is envious.
    Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
    And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
    It is my lady; O, it is my love!
    O that she knew she were!
    She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
    Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
    I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.  
    Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
    Having some business, do entreat her eyes
    To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
    What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
    The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
    As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
    Would through the airy region stream so bright
    That birds would sing and think it were not night.
    See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
    O that I were a glove upon that hand,
    That I might touch that cheek!
  Jul. Ay me!
  Rom. She speaks.
    O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
    As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
    As is a winged messenger of heaven
    Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
    Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
    When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
    And sails upon the bosom of the air.  
  Jul. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
    Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
    Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
    And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
  Rom. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
  Jul. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
    Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
    What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
    Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
    Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
    What's in a name? That which we call a rose
    By any other name would smell as sweet.
    So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
    Retain that dear perfection which he owes
    Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;
    And for that name, which is no part of thee,
    Take all myself.
  Rom. I take thee at thy word.
    Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
    Henceforth I never will be Romeo.  
  Jul. What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,
    So stumblest on my counsel?
  Rom. By a name
    I know not how to tell thee who I am.
    My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
    Because it is an enemy to thee.
    Had I it written, I would tear the word.
  Jul. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
    Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
    Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
  Rom. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
  Jul. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
    The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
    And the place death, considering who thou art,
    If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
  Rom. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
    For stony limits cannot hold love out,
    And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
    Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
  Jul. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.  
  Rom. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
    Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
    And I am proof against their enmity.
  Jul. I would not for the world they saw thee here.
  Rom. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
    And but thou love me, let them find me here.
    My life were better ended by their hate
    Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
  Jul. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
  Rom. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
    He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
    I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
    As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
    I would adventure for such merchandise.
  Jul. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
    Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
    For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
    Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny
    What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
    Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';  
    And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
    Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
    They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
    If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
    Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
    I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
    So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
    In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
    And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
    But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
    Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
    I should have been more strange, I must confess,
    But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
    My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
    And not impute this yielding to light love,
    Which the dark night hath so discovered.
  Rom. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
    That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
  Jul. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
    That monthly changes in her circled orb,  
    Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
  Rom. What shall I swear by?
  Jul. Do not swear at all;
    Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
    Which is the god of my idolatry,
    And I'll believe thee.
  Rom. If my heart's dear love-
  Jul. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
    I have no joy of this contract to-night.
    It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;
    Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
    Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
    This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
    May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.
    Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
    Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
  Rom. O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
  Jul. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
  Rom. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
  Jul. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;  
    And yet I would it were to give again.
  Rom. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
  Jul. But to be frank and give it thee again.
    And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
    My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
    My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
    The more I have, for both are infinite.
    I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
                                           [Nurse] calls within.
    Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
    Stay but a little, I will come again.                [Exit.]
  Rom. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
    Being in night, all this is but a dream,
    Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.

                       Enter Juliet above.

  Jul. Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
    If that thy bent of love be honourable,
    Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,  
    By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
    Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
    And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
    And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
  Nurse. (within) Madam!
  Jul. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,
    I do beseech thee-
  Nurse. (within) Madam!
  Jul. By-and-by I come.-
    To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.
    To-morrow will I send.
  Rom. So thrive my soul-
  Jul. A thousand times good night!                        Exit.
  Rom. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
    Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
    But love from love, towards school with heavy looks.

                     Enter Juliet again, [above].

  Jul. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice  
    To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
    Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;
    Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
    And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
    With repetition of my Romeo's name.
    Romeo!
  Rom. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
    How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
    Like softest music to attending ears!
  Jul. Romeo!
  Rom. My dear?
  Jul. At what o'clock to-morrow
    Shall I send to thee?
  Rom. By the hour of nine.
  Jul. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
    I have forgot why I did call thee back.
  Rom. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
  Jul. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
    Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
  Rom. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,  
    Forgetting any other home but this.
  Jul. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
    And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
    That lets it hop a little from her hand,
    Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
    And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
    So loving-jealous of his liberty.
  Rom. I would I were thy bird.
  Jul. Sweet, so would I.
    Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
    Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
    That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
                                                         [Exit.]
  Rom. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
    Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
    Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
    His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
 Exit




Scene III.
Friar Laurence's cell.

Enter Friar, [Laurence] alone, with a basket.

  Friar. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
    Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;
    And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
    From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
    Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
    The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
    I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
    With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
    The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
    What is her burying gave, that is her womb;
    And from her womb children of divers kind
    We sucking on her natural bosom find;
    Many for many virtues excellent,
    None but for some, and yet all different.
    O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
    In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
    For naught so vile that on the earth doth live  
    But to the earth some special good doth give;
    Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,
    Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
    Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
    And vice sometime's by action dignified.
    Within the infant rind of this small flower
    Poison hath residence, and medicine power;
    For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
    Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
    Two such opposed kings encamp them still
    In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
    And where the worser is predominant,
    Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

                        Enter Romeo.

  Rom. Good morrow, father.
  Friar. Benedicite!
    What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
    Young son, it argues a distempered head  
    So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
    Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
    And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
    But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
    Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
    Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
    Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
    Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
    Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
  Rom. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
  Friar. God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
  Rom. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
    I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
  Friar. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
  Rom. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
    I have been feasting with mine enemy,
    Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
    That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
    Within thy help and holy physic lies.
    I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,  
    My intercession likewise steads my foe.
  Friar. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift
    Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
  Rom. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
    On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
    As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
    And all combin'd, save what thou must combine
    By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
    We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,
    I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
    That thou consent to marry us to-day.
  Friar. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
    Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
    So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
    Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
    Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
    Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
    How much salt water thrown away in waste,
    To season love, that of it doth not taste!
    The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,  
    Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.
    Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
    Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
    If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
    Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
    And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:
    Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
  Rom. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
  Friar. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
  Rom. And bad'st me bury love.
  Friar. Not in a grave
    To lay one in, another out to have.
  Rom. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
    Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
    The other did not so.
  Friar. O, she knew well
    Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
    But come, young waverer, come go with me.
    In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
    For this alliance may so happy prove  
    To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
  Rom. O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.
  Friar. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene IV.
A street.

Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.

  Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?
    Came he not home to-night?
  Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
  Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
    Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
  Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
    Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
  Mer. A challenge, on my life.
  Ben. Romeo will answer it.
  Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
  Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being
    dared.
  Mer. Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white
    wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
    very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
    and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
  Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?  
  Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
    courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
    pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
    minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
    butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of
    the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
    immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
  Ben. The what?
  Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these
    new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall
    man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
    grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
    flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand so
    much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
    bench? O, their bones, their bones!

                               Enter Romeo.

  Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!
  Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art  
    thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
    in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she had a
    better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
    Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
    but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French
    salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
    fairly last night.
  Rom. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
  Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
  Rom. Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a
    case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
  Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
    man to bow in the hams.
  Rom. Meaning, to cursy.
  Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
  Rom. A most courteous exposition.
  Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
  Rom. Pink for flower.
  Mer. Right.
  Rom. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.  
  Mer. Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy
    pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
    remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
  Rom. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
  Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
  Rom. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
  Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
    hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I
    have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
  Rom. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
    for the goose.
  Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
  Rom. Nay, good goose, bite not!
  Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
  Rom. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
  Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
    narrow to an ell broad!
  Rom. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to the
    goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
  Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art  
    thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by
    art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a
    great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
    a hole.
  Ben. Stop there, stop there!
  Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
  Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
  Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I was
    come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy
    the argument no longer.
  Rom. Here's goodly gear!

                      Enter Nurse and her Man [Peter].

  Mer. A sail, a sail!
  Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
  Nurse. Peter!
  Peter. Anon.
  Nurse. My fan, Peter.
  Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of  
    the two.
  Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
  Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
  Nurse. Is it good-den?
  Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now
    upon the prick of noon.
  Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!
  Rom. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
  Nurse. By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,' quoth
    'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young
    Romeo?
  Rom. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you have
    found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of
    that name, for fault of a worse.
  Nurse. You say well.
  Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
    wisely.
  Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
  Ben. She will endite him to some supper.
  Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!  
  Rom. What hast thou found?
  Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
    something stale and hoar ere it be spent
                                     He walks by them and sings.

                   An old hare hoar,
                   And an old hare hoar,
                Is very good meat in Lent;
                   But a hare that is hoar
                   Is too much for a score
                When it hoars ere it be spent.

    Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
  Rom. I will follow you.
  Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
    [sings] lady, lady, lady.
                                      Exeunt Mercutio, Benvolio.
  Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
    this that was so full of his ropery?
  Rom. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and will  
    speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
  Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
    were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
    I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
    flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand
    by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
  Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon
    should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon
    as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law
    on my side.
  Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
    quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,
    my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
    keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
    into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
    behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
    therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
    ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
  Rom. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto
    thee-  
  Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
    Lord! she will be a joyful woman.
  Rom. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
  Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take
    it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
  Rom. Bid her devise
    Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
    And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
    Be shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.
  Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.
  Rom. Go to! I say you shall.
  Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
  Rom. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
    Within this hour my man shall be with thee
    And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
    Which to the high topgallant of my joy
    Must be my convoy in the secret night.
    Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
    Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
  Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.  
  Rom. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
  Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
    Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
  Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
  Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
    when 'twas a little prating thing- O, there is a nobleman in
    town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good
    soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger
    her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but
    I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout
    in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
    a letter?
  Rom. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
  Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the- No; I know
    it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
    sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
    to hear it.
  Rom. Commend me to thy lady.
  Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
  Peter. Anon.  
  Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene V.
Capulet's orchard.

Enter Juliet.

  Jul. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
    In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
    Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
    O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
    Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
    Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.
    Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw Love,
    And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
    Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
    Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
    Is three long hours; yet she is not come.
    Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
    She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
    My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
    And his to me,
    But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
    Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.  

                      Enter Nurse [and Peter].

    O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
    Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
  Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate.
                                                   [Exit Peter.]
  Jul. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
    Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
    If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
    By playing it to me with so sour a face.
  Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
    Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
  Jul. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
    Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
  Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
    Do you not see that I am out of breath?
  Jul. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
    To say to me that thou art out of breath?
    The excuse that thou dost make in this delay  
    Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
    Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
    Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
    Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
  Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to
    choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than
    any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
    foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they
    are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
    warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve God.
    What, have you din'd at home?
  Jul. No, no. But all this did I know before.
    What says he of our marriage? What of that?
  Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
    It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
    My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
    Beshrew your heart for sending me about
    To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
  Jul. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
    Sweet, sweet, Sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?  
  Nurse. Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous,
    and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where is
    your mother?
  Jul. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
    Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
    'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
    "Where is your mother?"'
  Nurse. O God's Lady dear!
    Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.
    Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
    Henceforward do your messages yourself.
  Jul. Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
  Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
  Jul. I have.
  Nurse. Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
    There stays a husband to make you a wife.
    Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
    They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
    Hie you to church; I must another way,
    To fetch a ladder, by the which your love  
    Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
    I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
    But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
    Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
  Jul. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene VI.
Friar Laurence's cell.

Enter Friar [Laurence] and Romeo.

  Friar. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
    That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
  Rom. Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,
    It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
    That one short minute gives me in her sight.
    Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
    Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
    It is enough I may but call her mine.
  Friar. These violent delights have violent ends
    And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
    Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
    Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
    And in the taste confounds the appetite.
    Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
    Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.

                     Enter Juliet.  

    Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
    Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
    A lover may bestride the gossamer
    That idles in the wanton summer air,
    And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
  Jul. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
  Friar. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
  Jul. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
  Rom. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
    Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more
    To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
    This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
    Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
    Receive in either by this dear encounter.
  Jul. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
    Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
    They are but beggars that can count their worth;
    But my true love is grown to such excess
    cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.  
  Friar. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
    For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
    Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
                                                       [Exeunt.]

