ACT III. SCENE I.
The prison

Enter DUKE, disguised as before, CLAUDIO, and PROVOST

  DUKE. So, then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
  CLAUDIO. The miserable have no other medicine
    But only hope:
    I have hope to Eve, and am prepar'd to die.
  DUKE. Be absolute for death; either death or life
    Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life.
    If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
    That none but fools would keep. A breath thou art,
    Servile to all the skyey influences,
    That dost this habitation where thou keep'st
    Hourly afflict. Merely, thou art Death's fool;
    For him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun
    And yet run'st toward him still. Thou art not noble;
    For all th' accommodations that thou bear'st
    Are nurs'd by baseness. Thou 'rt by no means valiant;
    For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
    Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,  
    And that thou oft provok'st; yet grossly fear'st
    Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself;
    For thou exists on many a thousand grains
    That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not;
    For what thou hast not, still thou striv'st to get,
    And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain;
    For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
    After the moon. If thou art rich, thou'rt poor;
    For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
    Thou bear'st thy heavy riches but a journey,
    And Death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none;
    For thine own bowels which do call thee sire,
    The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
    Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum,
    For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
    But, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep,
    Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
    Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
    Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
    Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,  
    To make thy riches pleasant. What's yet in this
    That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
    Lie hid moe thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
    That makes these odds all even.
  CLAUDIO. I humbly thank you.
    To sue to live, I find I seek to die;
    And, seeking death, find life. Let it come on.
  ISABELLA. [Within] What, ho! Peace here; grace and good company!
  PROVOST. Who's there? Come in; the wish deserves a welcome.
  DUKE. Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.
  CLAUDIO. Most holy sir, I thank you.

                        Enter ISABELLA

  ISABELLA. My business is a word or two with Claudio.
  PROVOST. And very welcome. Look, signior, here's your sister.
  DUKE. Provost, a word with you.
  PROVOST. As many as you please.
  DUKE. Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be conceal'd.
                                         Exeunt DUKE and PROVOST  
  CLAUDIO. Now, sister, what's the comfort?
  ISABELLA. Why,
    As all comforts are; most good, most good, indeed.
    Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
    Intends you for his swift ambassador,
    Where you shall be an everlasting leiger.
    Therefore, your best appointment make with speed;
    To-morrow you set on.
  CLAUDIO. Is there no remedy?
  ISABELLA. None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
    To cleave a heart in twain.
  CLAUDIO. But is there any?
  ISABELLA. Yes, brother, you may live:
    There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
    If you'll implore it, that will free your life,
    But fetter you till death.
  CLAUDIO. Perpetual durance?
  ISABELLA. Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint,
    Though all the world's vastidity you had,
    To a determin'd scope.  
  CLAUDIO. But in what nature?
  ISABELLA. In such a one as, you consenting to't,
    Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
    And leave you naked.
  CLAUDIO. Let me know the point.
  ISABELLA. O, I do fear thee, Claudio; and I quake,
    Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
    And six or seven winters more respect
    Than a perpetual honour. Dar'st thou die?
    The sense of death is most in apprehension;
    And the poor beetle that we tread upon
    In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
    As when a giant dies.
  CLAUDIO. Why give you me this shame?
    Think you I can a resolution fetch
    From flow'ry tenderness? If I must die,
    I will encounter darkness as a bride
    And hug it in mine arms.
  ISABELLA. There spake my brother; there my father's grave
    Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:  
    Thou art too noble to conserve a life
    In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
    Whose settled visage and deliberate word
    Nips youth i' th' head, and follies doth enew
    As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil;
    His filth within being cast, he would appear
    A pond as deep as hell.
  CLAUDIO. The precise Angelo!
  ISABELLA. O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell
    The damned'st body to invest and cover
    In precise guards! Dost thou think, Claudio,
    If I would yield him my virginity
    Thou mightst be freed?
  CLAUDIO. O heavens! it cannot be.
  ISABELLA. Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence,
    So to offend him still. This night's the time
    That I should do what I abhor to name,
    Or else thou diest to-morrow.
  CLAUDIO. Thou shalt not do't.
  ISABELLA. O, were it but my life!  
    I'd throw it down for your deliverance
    As frankly as a pin.
  CLAUDIO. Thanks, dear Isabel.
  ISABELLA. Be ready, Claudio, for your death to-morrow.
  CLAUDIO. Yes. Has he affections in him
    That thus can make him bite the law by th' nose
    When he would force it? Sure it is no sin;
    Or of the deadly seven it is the least.
  ISABELLA. Which is the least?
  CLAUDIO. If it were damnable, he being so wise,
    Why would he for the momentary trick
    Be perdurably fin'd?- O Isabel!
  ISABELLA. What says my brother?
  CLAUDIO. Death is a fearful thing.
  ISABELLA. And shamed life a hateful.
  CLAUDIO. Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
    To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
    This sensible warm motion to become
    A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
    To bathe in fiery floods or to reside  
    In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;
    To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
    And blown with restless violence round about
    The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
    Of those that lawless and incertain thought
    Imagine howling- 'tis too horrible.
    The weariest and most loathed worldly life
    That age, ache, penury, and imprisonment,
    Can lay on nature is a paradise
    To what we fear of death.
  ISABELLA. Alas, alas!
  CLAUDIO. Sweet sister, let me live.
    What sin you do to save a brother's life,
    Nature dispenses with the deed so far
    That it becomes a virtue.
  ISABELLA. O you beast!
    O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
    Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
    Is't not a kind of incest to take life
    From thine own sister's shame? What should I think?  
    Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair!
    For such a warped slip of wilderness
    Ne'er issu'd from his blood. Take my defiance;
    Die; perish. Might but my bending down
    Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
    I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
    No word to save thee.
  CLAUDIO. Nay, hear me, Isabel.
  ISABELLA. O fie, fie, fie!
    Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
    Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd;
    'Tis best that thou diest quickly.
  CLAUDIO. O, hear me, Isabella.

                            Re-enter DUKE

  DUKE. Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
  ISABELLA. What is your will?
  DUKE. Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have
    some speech with you; the satisfaction I would require is  
    likewise your own benefit.
  ISABELLA. I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be stolen out
    of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.
                                                   [Walks apart]
  DUKE. Son, I have overheard what hath pass'd between you and your
    sister. Angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her; only he hath
    made an assay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the
    disposition of natures. She, having the truth of honour in her,
    hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to
    receive. I am confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be true;
    therefore prepare yourself to death. Do not satisfy your
    resolution with hopes that are fallible; to-morrow you must die;
    go to your knees and make ready.
  CLAUDIO. Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love with life
    that I will sue to be rid of it.
  DUKE. Hold you there. Farewell. [Exit CLAUDIO] Provost, a word with
    you.

                          Re-enter PROVOST
  
  PROVOST. What's your will, father?
  DUKE. That, now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me a while
    with the maid; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch
    her by my company.
  PROVOST. In good time.                            Exit PROVOST
  DUKE. The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good; the
    goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness;
    but grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body
    of it ever fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you,
    fortune hath convey'd to my understanding; and, but that frailty
    hath examples for his falling, I should wonder at Angelo. How
    will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother?
  ISABELLA. I am now going to resolve him; I had rather my brother
    die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born. But, O, how
    much is the good Duke deceiv'd in Angelo! If ever he return, and
    I can speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or discover his
    government.
  DUKE. That shall not be much amiss; yet, as the matter now stands,
    he will avoid your accusation: he made trial of you only.
    Therefore fasten your ear on my advisings; to the love I have in  
    doing good a remedy presents itself. I do make myself believe
    that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited
    benefit; redeem your brother from the angry law; do no stain to
    your own gracious person; and much please the absent Duke, if
    peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this
    business.
  ISABELLA. Let me hear you speak farther; I have spirit to do
    anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
  DUKE. Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have you not
    heard speak of Mariana, the sister of Frederick, the great
    soldier who miscarried at sea?
  ISABELLA. I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her
    name.
  DUKE. She should this Angelo have married; was affianced to her by
    oath, and the nuptial appointed; between which time of the
    contract and limit of the solemnity her brother Frederick was
    wreck'd at sea, having in that perished vessel the dowry of his
    sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman:
    there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward
    her ever most kind and natural; with him the portion and sinew of  
    her fortune, her marriage-dowry; with both, her combinate
    husband, this well-seeming Angelo.
  ISABELLA. Can this be so? Did Angelo so leave her?
  DUKE. Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his
    comfort; swallowed his vows whole, pretending in her discoveries
    of dishonour; in few, bestow'd her on her own lamentation, which
    she yet wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is
    washed with them, but relents not.
  ISABELLA. What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from
    the world! What corruption in this life that it will let this man
    live! But how out of this can she avail?
  DUKE. It is a rupture that you may easily heal; and the cure of it
    not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in
    doing it.
  ISABELLA. Show me how, good father.
  DUKE. This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her
    first affection; his unjust unkindness, that in all reason should
    have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current,
    made it more violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo; answer his
    requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with his demands to  
    the point; only refer yourself to this advantage: first, that
    your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have all
    shadow and silence in it; and the place answer to convenience.
    This being granted in course- and now follows all: we shall
    advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment, go in your
    place. If the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter, it may
    compel him to her recompense; and here, by this, is your brother
    saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana advantaged, and
    the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid will I frame and make fit for
    his attempt. If you think well to carry this as you may, the
    doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof. What
    think you of it?
  ISABELLA. The image of it gives me content already; and I trust it
    will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
  DUKE. It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily to
    Angelo; if for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him
    promise of satisfaction. I will presently to Saint Luke's; there,
    at the moated grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that
    place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that it may be
    quickly.  
  ISABELLA. I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.
                                                Exeunt severally




Scene II.
The street before the prison

Enter, on one side, DUKE disguised as before; on the other, ELBOW,
and OFFICERS with POMPEY

  ELBOW. Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs
    buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the
    world drink brown and white bastard.
  DUKE. O heavens! what stuff is here?
  POMPEY. 'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest
    was put down, and the worser allow'd by order of law a furr'd
    gown to keep him warm; and furr'd with fox on lamb-skins too, to
    signify that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the
    facing.
  ELBOW. Come your way, sir. Bless you, good father friar.
  DUKE. And you, good brother father. What offence hath this man made
    you, sir?
  ELBOW. Marry, sir, he hath offended the law; and, sir, we take him
    to be a thief too, sir, for we have found upon him, sir, a
    strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.
  DUKE. Fie, sirrah, a bawd, a wicked bawd!  
    The evil that thou causest to be done,
    That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
    What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
    From such a filthy vice; say to thyself
    'From their abominable and beastly touches
    I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.'
    Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
    So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.
  POMPEY. Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet, sir,
    I would prove-
  DUKE. Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
    Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer;
    Correction and instruction must both work
    Ere this rude beast will profit.
  ELBOW. He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning.
    The deputy cannot abide a whoremaster; if he be a whoremonger,
    and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.
  DUKE. That we were all, as some would seem to be,
    From our faults, as his faults from seeming, free.
  ELBOW. His neck will come to your waist- a cord, sir.  

                          Enter LUCIO

  POMPEY. I spy comfort; I cry bail. Here's a gentleman, and a friend
    of mine.
  LUCIO. How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of Caesar? Art
    thou led in triumph? What, is there none of Pygmalion's images,
    newly made woman, to be had now for putting the hand in the
    pocket and extracting it clutch'd? What reply, ha? What say'st
    thou to this tune, matter, and method? Is't not drown'd i' th'
    last rain, ha? What say'st thou, trot? Is the world as it was,
    man? Which is the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The
    trick of it?
  DUKE. Still thus, and thus; still worse!
  LUCIO. How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she still,
    ha?
  POMPEY. Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is
    herself in the tub.
  LUCIO. Why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be so; ever
    your fresh whore and your powder'd bawd- an unshunn'd  
    consequence; it must be so. Art going to prison, Pompey?
  POMPEY. Yes, faith, sir.
  LUCIO. Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell; go, say I sent thee
    thither. For debt, Pompey- or how?
  ELBOW. For being a bawd, for being a bawd.
  LUCIO. Well, then, imprison him. If imprisonment be the due of a
    bawd, why, 'tis his right. Bawd is he doubtless, and of
    antiquity, too; bawd-born. Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to
    the prison, Pompey. You will turn good husband now, Pompey; you
    will keep the house.
  POMPEY. I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
  LUCIO. No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear. I will
    pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage. If you take it not
    patiently, why, your mettle is the more. Adieu trusty Pompey.
    Bless you, friar.
  DUKE. And you.
  LUCIO. Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?
  ELBOW. Come your ways, sir; come.
  POMPEY. You will not bail me then, sir?
  LUCIO. Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar? what news?  
  ELBOW. Come your ways, sir; come.
  LUCIO. Go to kennel, Pompey, go.

                               Exeunt ELBOW, POMPEY and OFFICERS

    What news, friar, of the Duke?
  DUKE. I know none. Can you tell me of any?
  LUCIO. Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other some, he is
    in Rome; but where is he, think you?
  DUKE. I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.
  LUCIO. It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the
    state and usurp the beggary he was never born to. Lord Angelo
    dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to't.
  DUKE. He does well in't.
  LUCIO. A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him;
    something too crabbed that way, friar.
  DUKE. It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
  LUCIO. Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is
    well allied; but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till
    eating and drinking be put down. They say this Angelo was not  
    made by man and woman after this downright way of creation. Is it
    true, think you?
  DUKE. How should he be made, then?
  LUCIO. Some report a sea-maid spawn'd him; some, that he was begot
    between two stock-fishes. But it is certain that when he makes
    water his urine is congeal'd ice; that I know to be true. And he
    is a motion generative; that's infallible.
  DUKE. You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
  LUCIO. Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion
    of a codpiece to take away the life of a man! Would the Duke that
    is absent have done this? Ere he would have hang'd a man for the
    getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a
    thousand. He had some feeling of the sport; he knew the service,
    and that instructed him to mercy.
  DUKE. I never heard the absent Duke much detected for women; he was
    not inclin'd that way.
  LUCIO. O, sir, you are deceiv'd.
  DUKE. 'Tis not possible.
  LUCIO. Who- not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty; and his use
    was to put a ducat in her clack-dish. The Duke had crotchets in  
    him. He would be drunk too; that let me inform you.
  DUKE. You do him wrong, surely.
  LUCIO. Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the Duke; and
    I believe I know the cause of his withdrawing.
  DUKE. What, I prithee, might be the cause?
  LUCIO. No, pardon; 'tis a secret must be lock'd within the teeth
    and the lips; but this I can let you understand: the greater file
    of the subject held the Duke to be wise.
  DUKE. Wise? Why, no question but he was.
  LUCIO. A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
  DUKE. Either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking; the very
    stream of his life, and the business he hath helmed, must, upon a
    warranted need, give him a better proclamation. Let him be but
    testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear to
    the envious a scholar, a statesman, and a soldier. Therefore you
    speak unskilfully; or, if your knowledge be more, it is much
    dark'ned in your malice.
  LUCIO. Sir, I know him, and I love him.
  DUKE. Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dearer
    love.  
  LUCIO. Come, sir, I know what I know.
  DUKE. I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak.
    But, if ever the Duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me
    desire you to make your answer before him. If it be honest you
    have spoke, you have courage to maintain it; I am bound to call
    upon you; and I pray you your name?
  LUCIO. Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the Duke.
  DUKE. He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to report you.
  LUCIO. I fear you not.
  DUKE. O, you hope the Duke will return no more; or you imagine me
    too unhurtful an opposite. But, indeed, I can do you little harm:
    you'll forswear this again.
  LUCIO. I'll be hang'd first. Thou art deceiv'd in me, friar. But no
    more of this. Canst thou tell if Claudio die to-morrow or no?
  DUKE. Why should he die, sir?
  LUCIO. Why? For filling a bottle with a tun-dish. I would the Duke
    we talk of were return'd again. This ungenitur'd agent will
    unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not build in
    his house-eaves because they are lecherous. The Duke yet would
    have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to  
    light. Would he were return'd! Marry, this Claudio is condemned
    for untrussing. Farewell, good friar; I prithee pray for me. The
    Duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on Fridays. He's not
    past it yet; and, I say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar
    though she smelt brown bread and garlic. Say that I said so.
    Farewell.                                               Exit
  DUKE. No might nor greatness in mortality
    Can censure scape; back-wounding calumny
    The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong
    Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
    But who comes here?

             Enter ESCALUS, PROVOST, and OFFICERS with
                           MISTRESS OVERDONE

  ESCALUS. Go, away with her to prison.
  MRS. OVERDONE. Good my lord, be good to me; your honour is
    accounted a merciful man; good my lord.
  ESCALUS. Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the
    same kind! This would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.  
  PROVOST. A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please your
    honour.
  MRS. OVERDONE. My lord, this is one Lucio's information against me.
    Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the Duke's time;
    he promis'd her marriage. His child is a year and a quarter old
    come Philip and Jacob; I have kept it myself; and see how he goes
    about to abuse me.
  ESCALUS. That fellow is a fellow of much license. Let him be call'd
    before us. Away with her to prison. Go to; no more words. [Exeunt
    OFFICERS with MISTRESS OVERDONE]  Provost, my brother Angelo will
    not be alter'd: Claudio must die to-morrow. Let him be furnish'd
    with divines, and have all charitable preparation. If my brother
    wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
  PROVOST. So please you, this friar hath been with him, and advis'd
    him for th' entertainment of death.
  ESCALUS. Good even, good father.
  DUKE. Bliss and goodness on you!
  ESCALUS. Of whence are you?
  DUKE. Not of this country, though my chance is now
    To use it for my time. I am a brother  
    Of gracious order, late come from the See
    In special business from his Holiness.
  ESCALUS. What news abroad i' th' world?
  DUKE. None, but that there is so great a fever on goodness that the
    dissolution of it must cure it. Novelty is only in request; and,
    as it is, as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course as it is
    virtuous to be constant in any undertakeing. There is scarce
    truth enough alive to make societies secure; but security enough
    to make fellowships accurst. Much upon this riddle runs the
    wisdom of the world. This news is old enough, yet it is every
    day's news. I pray you, sir, of what disposition was the Duke?
  ESCALUS. One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to
    know himself.
  DUKE. What pleasure was he given to?
  ESCALUS. Rather rejoicing to see another merry than merry at
    anything which profess'd to make him rejoice; a gentleman of all
    temperance. But leave we him to his events, with a prayer they
    may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find
    Claudio prepar'd. I am made to understand that you have lent him
    visitation.  
  DUKE. He professes to have received no sinister measure from his
    judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of
    justice. Yet had he framed to himself, by the instruction of his
    frailty, many deceiving promises of life; which I, by my good
    leisure, have discredited to him, and now he is resolv'd to die.
  ESCALUS. You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner
    the very debt of your calling. I have labour'd for the poor
    gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty; but my brother
    justice have I found so severe that he hath forc'd me to tell him
    he is indeed Justice.
  DUKE. If his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it
    shall become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath
    sentenc'd himself.
  ESCALUS. I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.
  DUKE. Peace be with you!            Exeunt ESCALUS and PROVOST

         He who the sword of heaven will bear
         Should be as holy as severe;
         Pattern in himself to know,
         Grace to stand, and virtue go;  
         More nor less to others paying
         Than by self-offences weighing.
         Shame to him whose cruel striking
         Kills for faults of his own liking!
         Twice treble shame on Angelo,
         To weed my vice and let his grow!
         O, what may man within him hide,
         Though angel on the outward side!
         How may likeness, made in crimes,
         Make a practice on the times,
         To draw with idle spiders' strings
         Most ponderous and substantial things!
         Craft against vice I must apply.
         With Angelo to-night shall lie
         His old betrothed but despised;
         So disguise shall, by th' disguised,
         Pay with falsehood false exacting,
         And perform an old contracting.                    Exit




Act IV. Scene I.
The moated grange at Saint Duke's

Enter MARIANA; and BOY singing

                             SONG

           Take, O, take those lips away,
             That so sweetly were forsworn;
           And those eyes, the break of day,
             Lights that do mislead the morn;
           But my kisses bring again, bring again;
           Seals of love, but seal'd in vain, seal'd in vain.

                  Enter DUKE, disguised as before

  MARIANA. Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away;
    Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
    Hath often still'd my brawling discontent.          Exit BOY
    I cry you mercy, sir, and well could wish
    You had not found me here so musical.
    Let me excuse me, and believe me so,  
    My mirth it much displeas'd, but pleas'd my woe.
  DUKE. 'Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
    To make bad good and good provoke to harm.
    I pray you tell me hath anybody inquir'd for me here to-day. Much
    upon this time have I promis'd here to meet.
  MARIANA. You have not been inquir'd after; I have sat here all day.

                         Enter ISABELLA

  DUKE. I do constantly believe you. The time is come even now. I
    shall crave your forbearance a little. May be I will call upon
    you anon, for some advantage to yourself.
  MARIANA. I am always bound to you.                        Exit
  DUKE. Very well met, and well come.
    What is the news from this good deputy?
  ISABELLA. He hath a garden circummur'd with brick,
    Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd;
    And to that vineyard is a planched gate
    That makes his opening with this bigger key;
    This other doth command a little door  
    Which from the vineyard to the garden leads.
    There have I made my promise
    Upon the heavy middle of the night
    To call upon him.
  DUKE. But shall you on your knowledge find this way?
  ISABELLA. I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't;
    With whispering and most guilty diligence,
    In action all of precept, he did show me
    The way twice o'er.
  DUKE. Are there no other tokens
    Between you 'greed concerning her observance?
  ISABELLA. No, none, but only a repair i' th' dark;
    And that I have possess'd him my most stay
    Can be but brief; for I have made him know
    I have a servant comes with me along,
    That stays upon me; whose persuasion is
    I come about my brother.
  DUKE. 'Tis well borne up.
    I have not yet made known to Mariana
    A word of this. What ho, within! come forth.  

                       Re-enter MARIANA

    I pray you be acquainted with this maid;
    She comes to do you good.
  ISABELLA. I do desire the like.
  DUKE. Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?
  MARIANA. Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.
  DUKE. Take, then, this your companion by the hand,
    Who hath a story ready for your ear.
    I shall attend your leisure; but make haste;
    The vaporous night approaches.
  MARIANA. Will't please you walk aside?
                                     Exeunt MARIANA and ISABELLA
  DUKE. O place and greatness! Millions of false eyes
    Are stuck upon thee. Volumes of report
    Run with these false, and most contrarious quest
    Upon thy doings. Thousand escapes of wit
    Make thee the father of their idle dream,
    And rack thee in their fancies.  

                 Re-enter MARIANA and ISABELLA

    Welcome, how agreed?
  ISABELLA. She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
    If you advise it.
  DUKE. It is not my consent,
    But my entreaty too.
  ISABELLA. Little have you to say,
    When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
    'Remember now my brother.'
  MARIANA. Fear me not.
  DUKE. Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
    He is your husband on a pre-contract.
    To bring you thus together 'tis no sin,
    Sith that the justice of your title to him
    Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go;
    Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.       Exeunt




SCENE II.
The prison

Enter PROVOST and POMPEY

  PROVOST. Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's head?
  POMPEY. If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a
    married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never cut of a
    woman's head.
  PROVOST. Come, sir, leave me your snatches and yield me a direct
    answer. To-morrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine. Here
    is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a
    helper; if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem
    you from your gyves; if not, you shall have your full time of
    imprisonment, and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping, for
    you have been a notorious bawd.
  POMPEY. Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind; but yet
    I will be content to be a lawful hangman. I would be glad to
    receive some instructions from my fellow partner.
  PROVOST. What ho, Abhorson! Where's Abhorson there?

                          Enter ABHORSON  

  ABHORSON. Do you call, sir?
  PROVOST. Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in your
    execution. If you think it meet, compound with him by the year,
    and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present,
    and dismiss him. He cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath
    been a bawd.
  ABHORSON. A bawd, sir? Fie upon him! He will discredit our mystery.
  PROVOST. Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn the
    scale.                                                  Exit
  POMPEY. Pray, sir, by your good favour- for surely, sir, a good
    favour you have but that you have a hanging look- do you call,
    sir, your occupation a mystery?
  ABHORSON. Ay, sir; a mystery.
  POMPEY. Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and your
    whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, do
    prove my occupation a mystery; but what mystery there should be
    in hanging, if I should be hang'd, I cannot imagine.
  ABHORSON. Sir, it is a mystery.
  POMPEY. Proof?  
  ABHORSON. Every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be too
    little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough; if it
    be too big for your thief, your thief thinks it little enough; so
    every true man's apparel fits your thief.

                          Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. Are you agreed?
  POMPEY. Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman is a more
    penitent trade than your bawd; he doth oftener ask forgiveness.
  PROVOST. You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow
    four o'clock.
  ABHORSON. Come on, bawd; I will instruct thee in my trade; follow.
  POMPEY. I do desire to learn, sir; and I hope, if you have occasion
    to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for truly,
    sir, for your kindness I owe you a good turn.
  PROVOST. Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.
                                      Exeunt ABHORSON and POMPEY
    Th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
    Being a murderer, though he were my brother.  

                           Enter CLAUDIO

    Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death;
    'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
    Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?
  CLAUDIO. As fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour
    When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones.
    He will not wake.
  PROVOST. Who can do good on him?
    Well, go, prepare yourself. [Knocking within] But hark, what
      noise?
    Heaven give your spirits comfort!               Exit CLAUDIO
    [Knocking continues] By and by.
    I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
    For the most gentle Claudio.

                 Enter DUKE, disguised as before

    Welcome, father.  
  DUKE. The best and wholesom'st spirits of the night
    Envelop you, good Provost! Who call'd here of late?
  PROVOST. None, since the curfew rung.
  DUKE. Not Isabel?
  PROVOST. No.
  DUKE. They will then, ere't be long.
  PROVOST. What comfort is for Claudio?
  DUKE. There's some in hope.
  PROVOST. It is a bitter deputy.
  DUKE. Not so, not so; his life is parallel'd
    Even with the stroke and line of his great justice;
    He doth with holy abstinence subdue
    That in himself which he spurs on his pow'r
    To qualify in others. Were he meal'd with that
    Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;
    But this being so, he's just. [Knocking within] Now are they
      come.                                         Exit PROVOST
    This is a gentle provost; seldom when
    The steeled gaoler is the friend of men. [Knocking within]
    How now, what noise! That spirit's possess'd with haste  
    That wounds th' unsisting postern with these strokes.

                        Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. There he must stay until the officer
    Arise to let him in; he is call'd up.
  DUKE. Have you no countermand for Claudio yet
    But he must die to-morrow?
  PROVOST. None, sir, none.
  DUKE. As near the dawning, Provost, as it is,
    You shall hear more ere morning.
  PROVOST. Happily
    You something know; yet I believe there comes
    No countermand; no such example have we.
    Besides, upon the very siege of justice,
    Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
    Profess'd the contrary.

                         Enter a MESSENGER  
    This is his lordship's man.
  DUKE. And here comes Claudio's pardon.
  MESSENGER. My lord hath sent you this note; and by me this further
    charge, that you swerve not from the smallest article of it,
    neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. Good morrow; for
    as I take it, it is almost day.
  PROVOST. I shall obey him.                      Exit MESSENGER
  DUKE. [Aside] This is his pardon, purchas'd by such sin
    For which the pardoner himself is in;
    Hence hath offence his quick celerity,
    When it is borne in high authority.
    When vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended
    That for the fault's love is th' offender friended.
    Now, sir, what news?
  PROVOST. I told you: Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine
    office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks
    strangely, for he hath not us'd it before.
  DUKE. Pray you, let's hear.
  PROVOST. [Reads] 'Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let
    Claudio be executed by four of the clock, and, in the afternoon,  
    Barnardine. For my better satisfaction, let me have Claudio's
    head sent me by five. Let this be duly performed, with a thought
    that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. Thus fail not
    to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.'
    What say you to this, sir?
  DUKE. What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in th'
    afternoon?
  PROVOST. A Bohemian born; but here nurs'd up and bred.
    One that is a prisoner nine years old.
  DUKE. How came it that the absent Duke had not either deliver'd him
    to his liberty or executed him? I have heard it was ever his
    manner to do so.
  PROVOST. His friends still wrought reprieves for him; and, indeed,
    his fact, till now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to
    an undoubted proof.
  DUKE. It is now apparent?
  PROVOST. Most manifest, and not denied by himself.
  DUKE. Hath he borne himself penitently in prison? How seems he to
    be touch'd?
  PROVOST. A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a  
    drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless, of what's past,
    present, or to come; insensible of mortality and desperately
    mortal.
  DUKE. He wants advice.
  PROVOST. He will hear none. He hath evermore had the liberty of the
    prison; give him leave to escape hence, he would not; drunk many
    times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. We have very oft
    awak'd him, as if to carry him to execution, and show'd him a
    seeming warrant for it; it hath not moved him at all.
  DUKE. More of him anon. There is written in your brow, Provost,
    honesty and constancy. If I read it not truly, my ancient skill
    beguiles me; but in the boldness of my cunning I will lay myself
    in hazard. Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no
    greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath sentenc'd him. To
    make you understand this in a manifested effect, I crave but four
    days' respite; for the which you are to do me both a present and
    a dangerous courtesy.
  PROVOST. Pray, sir, in what?
  DUKE. In the delaying death.
  PROVOST. Alack! How may I do it, having the hour limited, and an  
    express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view
    of Angelo? I may make my case as Claudio's, to cross this in the
    smallest.
  DUKE. By the vow of mine order, I warrant you, if my instructions
    may be your guide. Let this Barnardine be this morning executed,
    and his head borne to Angelo.
  PROVOST. Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.
  DUKE. O, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it. Shave
    the head and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the
    penitent to be so bar'd before his death. You know the course is
    common. If anything fall to you upon this more than thanks and
    good fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead against
    it with my life.
  PROVOST. Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.
  DUKE. Were you sworn to the Duke, or to the deputy?
  PROVOST. To him and to his substitutes.
  DUKE. You will think you have made no offence if the Duke avouch
    the justice of your dealing?
  PROVOST. But what likelihood is in that?
  DUKE. Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see you  
    fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion, can
    with ease attempt you, I will go further than I meant, to pluck
    all fears out of you. Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of
    the Duke. You know the character, I doubt not; and the signet is
    not strange to you.
  PROVOST. I know them both.
  DUKE. The contents of this is the return of the Duke; you shall
    anon over-read it at your pleasure, where you shall find within
    these two days he will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows
    not; for he this very day receives letters of strange tenour,
    perchance of the Duke's death, perchance entering into some
    monastery; but, by chance, nothing of what is writ. Look, th'
    unfolding star calls up the shepherd. Put not yourself into
    amazement how these things should be: all difficulties are but
    easy when they are known. Call your executioner, and off with
    Barnardine's head. I will give him a present shrift, and advise
    him for a better place. Yet you are amaz'd, but this shall
    absolutely resolve you. Come away; it is almost clear dawn.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE III.
The prison

Enter POMPEY

  POMPEY. I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of
    profession; one would think it were Mistress Overdone's own
    house, for here be many of her old customers. First, here's young
    Master Rash; he's in for a commodity of brown paper and old
    ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, of which he made five
    marks ready money. Marry, then ginger was not much in request,
    for the old women were all dead. Then is there here one Master
    Caper, at the suit of Master Threepile the mercer, for some four
    suits of peach-colour'd satin, which now peaches him a beggar.
    Then have we here young Dizy, and young Master Deepvow, and
    Master Copperspur, and Master Starvelackey, the rapier and dagger
    man, and young Dropheir that kill'd lusty Pudding, and Master
    Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shootie the great
    traveller, and wild Halfcan that stabb'd Pots, and, I think,
    forty more- all great doers in our trade, and are now 'for the
    Lord's sake.'
  
                            Enter ABHORSON

  ABHORSON. Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.
  POMPEY. Master Barnardine! You must rise and be hang'd, Master
    Barnardine!
  ABHORSON. What ho, Barnardine!
  BARNARDINE. [Within] A pox o' your throats! Who makes that noise
    there? What are you?
  POMPEY. Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so good, sir,
    to rise and be put to death.
  BARNARDINE. [ Within ] Away, you rogue, away; I am sleepy.
  ABHORSON. Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.
  POMPEY. Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and
    sleep afterwards.
  ABHORSON. Go in to him, and fetch him out.
  POMPEY. He is coming, sir, he is coming; I hear his straw rustle.

                             Enter BARNARDINE

  ABHORSON. Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?  
  POMPEY. Very ready, sir.
  BARNARDINE. How now, Abhorson, what's the news with you?
  ABHORSON. Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers;
    for, look you, the warrant's come.
  BARNARDINE. You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am not
    fitted for't.
  POMPEY. O, the better, sir! For he that drinks all night and is
    hanged betimes in the morning may sleep the sounder all the next
    day.

                  Enter DUKE, disguised as before

  ABHORSON. Look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father.
    Do we jest now, think you?
  DUKE. Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are
    to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort you, and pray with
    you.
  BARNARDINE. Friar, not I; I have been drinking hard all night, and
    I will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my
    brains with billets. I will not consent to die this day, that's  
    certain.
  DUKE. O, Sir, you must; and therefore I beseech you
    Look forward on the journey you shall go.
  BARNARDINE. I swear I will not die to-day for any man's persuasion.
  DUKE. But hear you-
  BARNARDINE. Not a word; if you have anything to say to me, come to
    my ward; for thence will not I to-day.                  Exit
  DUKE. Unfit to live or die. O gravel heart!
    After him, fellows; bring him to the block.
                                      Exeunt ABHORSON and POMPEY

                            Enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
  DUKE. A creature unprepar'd, unmeet for death;
    And to transport him in the mind he is
    Were damnable.
  PROVOST. Here in the prison, father,
    There died this morning of a cruel fever
    One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,  
    A man of Claudio's years; his beard and head
    Just of his colour. What if we do omit
    This reprobate till he were well inclin'd,
    And satisfy the deputy with the visage
    Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?
  DUKE. O, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
    Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
    Prefix'd by Angelo. See this be done,
    And sent according to command; whiles I
    Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
  PROVOST. This shall be done, good father, presently.
    But Barnardine must die this afternoon;
    And how shall we continue Claudio,
    To save me from the danger that might come
    If he were known alive?
  DUKE. Let this be done:
    Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio.
    Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
    To the under generation, you shall find
    Your safety manifested.  
  PROVOST. I am your free dependant.
  DUKE. Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.
                                                    Exit PROVOST
    Now will I write letters to Angelo-
    The Provost, he shall bear them- whose contents
    Shall witness to him I am near at home,
    And that, by great injunctions, I am bound
    To enter publicly. Him I'll desire
    To meet me at the consecrated fount,
    A league below the city; and from thence,
    By cold gradation and well-balanc'd form.
    We shall proceed with Angelo.

                         Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. Here is the head; I'll carry it myself.
  DUKE. Convenient is it. Make a swift return;
    For I would commune with you of such things
    That want no ear but yours.
  PROVOST. I'll make all speed.                             Exit  
  ISABELLA. [ Within ] Peace, ho, be here!
  DUKE. The tongue of Isabel. She's come to know
    If yet her brother's pardon be come hither;
    But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
    To make her heavenly comforts of despair
    When it is least expected.

                           Enter ISABELLA

  ISABELLA. Ho, by your leave!
  DUKE. Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
  ISABELLA. The better, given me by so holy a man.
    Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
  DUKE. He hath releas'd him, Isabel, from the world.
    His head is off and sent to Angelo.
  ISABELLA. Nay, but it is not so.
  DUKE. It is no other.
    Show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience,
  ISABELLA. O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!
  DUKE. You shall not be admitted to his sight.  
  ISABELLA. Unhappy Claudio! Wretched Isabel!
    Injurious world! Most damned Angelo!
  DUKE. This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot;
    Forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.
    Mark what I say, which you shall find
    By every syllable a faithful verity.
    The Duke comes home to-morrow. Nay, dry your eyes.
    One of our covent, and his confessor,
    Gives me this instance. Already he hath carried
    Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
    Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
    There to give up their pow'r. If you can, pace your wisdom
    In that good path that I would wish it go,
    And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
    Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,
    And general honour.
  ISABELLA. I am directed by you.
  DUKE. This letter, then, to Friar Peter give;
    'Tis that he sent me of the Duke's return.
    Say, by this token, I desire his company  
    At Mariana's house to-night. Her cause and yours
    I'll perfect him withal; and he shall bring you
    Before the Duke; and to the head of Angelo
    Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
    I am combined by a sacred vow,
    And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter.
    Command these fretting waters from your eyes
    With a light heart; trust not my holy order,
    If I pervert your course. Who's here?

                           Enter LUCIO

  LUCIO. Good even. Friar, where's the Provost?
  DUKE. Not within, sir.
  LUCIO. O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes
    so red. Thou must be patient. I am fain to dine and sup with
    water and bran; I dare not for my head fill my belly; one
    fruitful meal would set me to't. But they say the Duke will be
    here to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I lov'd thy brother. If the
    old fantastical Duke of dark corners had been at home, he had  
    lived.                                         Exit ISABELLA
  DUKE. Sir, the Duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports;
    but the best is, he lives not in them.
  LUCIO. Friar, thou knowest not the Duke so well as I do; he's a
    better woodman than thou tak'st him for.
  DUKE. Well, you'll answer this one day. Fare ye well.
  LUCIO. Nay, tarry; I'll go along with thee; I can tell thee pretty
    tales of the Duke.
  DUKE. You have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be
    true; if not true, none were enough.
  LUCIO. I was once before him for getting a wench with child.
  DUKE. Did you such a thing?
  LUCIO. Yes, marry, did I; but I was fain to forswear it: they would
    else have married me to the rotten medlar.
  DUKE. Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.
  LUCIO. By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end. If bawdy
    talk offend you, we'll have very little of it. Nay, friar, I am a
    kind of burr; I shall stick.                          Exeunt




SCENE IV.
ANGELO'S house

Enter ANGELO and ESCALUS

  ESCALUS. Every letter he hath writ hath disvouch'd other.
  ANGELO. In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions show much
    like to madness; pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted! And why
    meet him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there?
  ESCALUS. I guess not.
  ANGELO. And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his
    ent'ring that, if any crave redress of injustice, they should
    exhibit their petitions in the street?
  ESCALUS. He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of
     complaints; and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which
    shall then have no power to stand against us.
  ANGELO. Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaim'd;
    Betimes i' th' morn I'll call you at your house;
    Give notice to such men of sort and suit
    As are to meet him.
  ESCALUS. I shall, sir; fare you well.
  ANGELO. Good night.                               Exit ESCALUS  
    This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
    And dull to all proceedings. A deflow'red maid!
    And by an eminent body that enforc'd
    The law against it! But that her tender shame
    Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
    How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no;
    For my authority bears a so credent bulk
    That no particular scandal once can touch
    But it confounds the breather. He should have liv'd,
    Save that his riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
    Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge,
    By so receiving a dishonour'd life
    With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had liv'd!
    Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
    Nothing goes right; we would, and we would not.         Exit




SCENE V.
Fields without the town

Enter DUKE in his own habit, and Friar PETER

  DUKE. These letters at fit time deliver me.   [Giving letters]
    The Provost knows our purpose and our plot.
    The matter being afoot, keep your instruction
    And hold you ever to our special drift;
    Though sometimes you do blench from this to that
    As cause doth minister. Go, call at Flavius' house,
    And tell him where I stay; give the like notice
    To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus,
    And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;
    But send me Flavius first.
    PETER. It shall be speeded well.                  Exit FRIAR

                             Enter VARRIUS

  DUKE. I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste.
    Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends
    Will greet us here anon. My gentle Varrius!           Exeunt




SCENE VI.
A street near the city gate

Enter ISABELLA and MARIANA

  ISABELLA. To speak so indirectly I am loath;
    I would say the truth; but to accuse him so,
    That is your part. Yet I am advis'd to do it;
    He says, to veil full purpose.
  MARIANA. Be rul'd by him.
  ISABELLA. Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
    He speak against me on the adverse side,
    I should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic
    That's bitter to sweet end.
  MARIANA. I would Friar Peter-

                         Enter FRIAR PETER

  ISABELLA. O, peace! the friar is come.
  PETER. Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
    Where you may have such vantage on the Duke
    He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded;  
    The generous and gravest citizens
    Have hent the gates, and very near upon
    The Duke is ent'ring; therefore, hence, away.         Exeunt

